The Ken Genest I can describe will be just one facet of a man who had other facets too.  I was pretty young when I first met him, so forgive me if youth colors my perspective.  

My earliest memory of my dad is a memory of a household object that he planted in his wake: his coffee mug.
He would leave it at eye level where I would find it as I wandered our house.  
You have to picture me in 1968, table tops were just a little over my head so I would poke around, trying to leave the zone of supervision, and if I found The Mug I'd grab it with both hands I would upend them and drink the single swallow that usually remained.  The coffee was of course cold, sugary, with just a bit of milk.  "I tried to quit once" he said, years later.  "Quitting coffee was much harder for me than quitting smoking.  That might be unusual."

I'm only going to mention one other childhood memory -- his tape.

My earliest memory of my dad is rolls of masking tape.  
In our basement there were rolls and rolls of masking tape, hanging on pegboards. 
Unlike the masking tape at other people's house, none of ours was the right color, that masking tape color, and none of it was the right size.  His rolls were usually jet-black, or maybe silver, red, or green.  This masking tape was everywhere: on the pegboard, stacked on the table, lost, behind a cabinet, or in drawers, buried in piles of tools for making art. 
And what I later found out he was doing with tape was drawing.   He and the GM Design Center artists, were buying tape by the carton, in widths ranging from normal all the way down to 1/16".  What they were doing was drawing.  They were drawing cars on 15 foot long sheets of paper that they had tacked up on the wall.  

My dad wasn't sure who started drawing with the tape but he felt it was someone there at the Design Center.  They had invented, years before computers, a way to lay down the darkest, sharpest line imaginable on these enormous pieces of paper, drawing in 1:1 scale, I think.  The drawings all fell apart after a couple years in a drawer of course, so all we have are the archivist drawings -- hopefully.

Dad talked a lot about work.  He came home from the Tech Center talking about streamlining and wind tunnels.  He started talking about crash-test dummies and about how in the future, cars would add a second seatbelt for your upper body.  He said GM had learned to make a bag that could explode from the steering wheel center but that noone could imagine it making it into production.    

Alot of what he and his friends drew went into a drawer or a file and that was it, but his team at GM brought two major designs to market.  The Buick Riviera I actually have no idea what it looks like.  But the Chevy Corvair is an icon of the 60s, much more famous.  He told me that his team was going for was the excitement of a German rear-engine, rear-drive setup, like a Porsche or a VW Bug.  The engineering of the Corvair (not my dad's job) included a rear suspension that was a little ahead of it's time which, unfortunately would sometimes flip the car over and kill the occupants.  General Motors fixed this part of the design in later years but dropped the Corvair entirely after ____.  I drove one when I was 19.  I found it extremely fun.  The steering was pretty hard to describe but it was nothing like any car you've ever driven; I highly recommend it.  Our family owned a light blue Corvair that was sky blue and later, sky blue with rust highlights.  Like many of the designers, Dad also had to have a two-seater.  His was a red, ragtop Fiat.  My two memories of the Fiat are Dad repairing the rust holes and once or twice riding in it listening to Motown on the AM radio. It was 1968 and I was three.  Later, when I rediscovered Motown, it was for quite awhile in my mind 'that music from Dad's sportscar.''

He sketched a bus for General Motors at some point.  I remember sitting parked in my dad's station wagon around 1978, and we watched one of the new SEMTA buses go by and he sort of said vaguely "I think that's my design.  I did some drawings a long time ago and never knew where they ended up, but that is the basic shape of my bus: front, back, everything." 

Why am I remembering him by his objects?  He was a little bit distant then.  Even if he were present, he would allow you some space.  He wouldn't ge tup in your face and try to be running the show.  He would listen and he would observe you.  He was comfortable being in a room with someone and letting them do their thing and he would do his. 


There was a ten year period then when I stopped seeing him.   He started a family with Sharon, Billy, April, Gene, and Jimmy. We became a little estranged.  I was pretty occupied, becoming an adult, so I didn't totally notice.  But we must have had a phone call or some awkward chat in the mid-eighties and, making small talk, it came out that he was doing a lot of biking.  Like A TON.  Riding to work, buying a bike, inevitably buying another bike,  (a third even?).  Bikes became like a new sports car for him.  He stopped smoking, started talking a lot about 'Rails to Trails.'  Conversations would eventually circle around to advocating for making bicycle corridors wherever there were unused train tracks.  

We started meeting in parking lots around Rochester.  He'd show up with a couple of Treks or Gary Fishers on the roof rack.  The bikes gave us a very male way to talk to have something to talk about.  My family in general, not just him, doesn't do a lot of 'how have you been', "are you eating enough?"  We would chatter nonstop about how to weld aluminum, do you think a bike could be made from graphite, but how would you weld graphite, look at these handlebars (they were shaped like a giant paper clip), oh you got a flat, look that is called a 'snakebite' (when the rim pinches the tube, rolling over a big tree root).

These conversations were kind of the first time I met my dad.  Over the years, eventually I asked him enough questions to learn about the masking tape, the Bible, all the stories of his new family, why he fought and divorced my mom, what he remembered about his own dad, about his only sibling (Richard, a year older and 3x more 'energetic'), what did he do in the Army, why did he become an artist.

I recorded interviews with him twice.  I wish I could do a third interview.  If he would agree to it, I would interview him one more time.  I'd show him a palette of colors, ask him which were his favorites, and why.  I would like to ask him whether it made him uncomfortable that we are politically opposite -- he has obviously accomodated it somehow, because it never seemed to be a barrier to our relationship.  

He is unsmiling in many of his photos, but not later in life.  In his last ten years he has a mellowed, pleased expression.  I'd like to show him photos of himself from each decade and ask him to explain the expression on his face.  

His expressions and actions live on.  When I see my two sisters, I see them act and talk in ways that aren't like me, and often I recognize it as a little glimpse of my dad.  In these, he is still with us. 

In other ways, he is gone.  His personality was really unique.  He was a bit incommunicative, with a rich inner life.  A bit passive, but also, calm, reflective.  Towards the end, wise.  Very sober.  He had the winking humor of his dad, giving a pinch when you weren't looking.  Lying on his hospital bed last week, when ALS had stolen from him almost all of his movement, even the ability to breathe, finally, and deafness had taken his ability to freely communicate, and the mask had taken his ability to speak, he played footsie with me.  I could hardly believe it.   I would look away and there'd be a tap and I'd look back and he would be looking somewhere else. A total straight-faced joker.  So much love in his humor.   

I want to mention one more piece of GM Tech that we should be proud of is the names on the sides of the vehicles.  When you see Chevy and GMC trucks like the Silverado, the name on the tailgate is from his group.  GM made their own font and Dad would set the letters up into the name, doing the kerning and sizing with a penknife and rubber cement.  
He also generated an enormous number of Jesus logos around this time.  
As you leave here today, I hope you will notice the back ends of these vehicles when you are at stoplights because it is a reminder of the numerous little piece of him that is still alive.


